---
title: Amplify Documentation Safari
url: 2025-06-11-amplify-docs-safari.md
desc: ''
updated: 11/06/2025
created: 11/06/2025
tags: ['aws', 'amplify', 'docs']
---


# Amplify Documentation Safari

Join me for a pinball ride through the Amplify docs, where you have to bob and weave in order to reach our goal of connecting an AppSync backend to a Vue frontend via the Amplify service and modules.

## Background

### Amplify

Amplify is an ecosystem that contains cli, scaffolding, and UI tools.

The combination of these tools means that we can:
- Configure a client API to hit our AppSync backend
- Configure the authentication flow as Cognito
- Use pre-build UI components to handle the authentication stories via Cognito: sign in, sign up, login, forgot password
- Manage tokens from Cognito
- Send queries down to this API

Of note to us, is the integration with Cognito for auth, and calls to the Appsync backend.

### Cognito

Cognito is an OAuth flow implementation and as such would require some legwork (boilerplate code) to manage keys and orchestrate the flows correctly.

With Amplify we get UI components, and API configurations. We no longer manage tokens and the standard OAuth flows, vastly simplifying the service logic.

### Service architecture

Backend:
- AppSync with data sources as Lambda, DynamoDB, etc
- Cognito for auth

Frontend: 
- Framework use: Vue, React etc
- Cognitor for auth

## Plans

Use Amplify for:
- Connecting to a pre-deployed AppSync API
- Authenticating via Cognito, managing tokens behind the scenes
- Running GraphQL queries and getting data back in the UI

The goals of this article: 
- Enumerate and explain documentation locations
- Sign-post and add commentary about documentation

## Amplify, code generation

A big chore for GraphQL processes is the mirroring of queries across backend and frontend. 

With Amplify you can with one command generate code for all Queries and Mutations from your AppSync API:

```
npx @aws-amplify/cli codegen add --apiId YOUR_APPSYNC_API_ID --region YOUR_REGION
```

This generates files inside `graphql/` for `queries.js` and `mutations.js` with following examples

```js
export const getProfile = /* GraphQL */ `
  query GetProfile($screenName: String!) {
    getProfile(screenName: $screenName) {
      id
      name
      screenName
      imgUrl
      bgImgUrl
      bio
      location
      website
      birthdate
      createdAt
      tweets {
        nextToken
        __typename
      }
      followersCount
      followingCount
      tweetsCount
      likesCount
      following
      followedBy
      __typename
    }
  }
`;
```

## Amplify Docs safari

### 1. Amplify Vue Docs

Best starting point is the official Amplify Docs, scoped by framework of choice.

[Amplify UI / Vue ](https://docs.amplify.aws/vue/)

From here, follow the [Set up Amplify Data](https://docs.amplify.aws/vue/build-a-backend/data/set-up-data/)

Once on the page you notice that the setup involves the scaffolding of both backend and frontend in parallel using Amplify. 

The audience for Amplify seems to be folks that use it for both. 

> I'd wager a bet that most developers build AppSync with Serverless Framework, CDK, or Terraform, bypassing Amplify on the backend, whilst using Amplify libraries on the UI.

As someone with a pre-deployed AppSync API, that means hunting and pecking through the docs for relevant code and instructions.

What is useful here, is how to create the API on the client using `generateClient` from `aws-amplify/data`

> Important because of the many ways to achieve this. Amplify modules tend to look the same, but contain key api variations that cause setup trouble. 

As a result, the docs above are not a good starting point!

### 2. AppSync Console

Most sensible spot to start, is the Appsync Console (web).

- From the AWS Console
- Navigate to AppSync
- Open your specific AP

The instructions should appear my default on the main page, but they are are incomplete.

These instructions make use of `./aws-exports.js` which is not defined or explained.

> After a bit of experimentation, the aws-exports.js file is generated by one of the aws-amplify methods for creating an API. 

We can guess that it involves configuration details, but in the following steps the configuration variables are hard-coded in the file. 

Also there are no:
- mentions about how to hide this sensitive information or how to use .env variables
- configuration explanations for Cognito, even though most Appsync solutions will use it

### 3. Amplify UI Vue docs

Essentially the same as point 1. but more focused on the frontend. Thus more relevant for your needs. 

Requires framework scoping selection, below focused on Vue.

[Amplify UI / Vue / connected-components / Authenticator](https://ui.docs.amplify.aws/vue/connected-components/authenticator)

At this point in our journey with Amplify and Appsync, we identiy as a developer who wants to connect a UI to an existing AppSync backend via Amplify.

Even though the docs here should be for us, the instructions are too simple:
- Doesn't cover any Sign In, Sign Up flows
- Doesn't explain how to render different auth components depending on the authentication states: authenticated, unauthenticated, or loading.

There is more information within the 'Advanced Usage' section of the docs, but all of the initial instructions are replaced my them. 

> To me, these 'advanced' use cases, are just base requirements in 2025

## Sandboxing

Throughout the docs sand-boxing is mentioned, but never fully detailed. 

[Amplify docs / sanbox-environments / features](https://docs.amplify.aws/vue/deploy-and-host/sandbox-environments/features/)

Unclear how to use sand-boxing with an existing API but the secrets explanation is very helpful and interesting.

Via sand-boxing you attach secrets to a sandbox, and then reference it within your backend. The 'backend' definition here is murky, is it a local backend generated with Amplify, is it a Vue SSR backend, or is it an AWS backend?

Here we can find the 'Generate client config' docs, which outlines how to create `amplify_outputs.json` mentioned above.

No details on how to integrate a sandbox with a pre-deployed API or how to manage a sandbox in that instance. Seems like 'sand-boxing' is purely reserved for Amplify deployed resources, which tend to be sand-boxed within Amplify environments by default.

## Conclusion

We have found a solution for configuring the auth with Amplify, and doing the Cognito auth via it's libraries.

We have also found a way to `defineClient()` via Amplify and make calls to the GraphQL backend.

Unresolved is the topic of, how to best establish the GraphQL backend integration.

The docs are inconsistent in details, and they rarely cover the setup from the perspective of different users. For the Amplify team, the only user of their API is a developer which is deploying with Amplify.

What happens to the UI libraries then? Are they only meant for those users? 

I do plan to write a "how to" containing all the steps for the setup, and best practice suggestions.
